Düsseldorf sprint report

Hello everyone!

We are happy to report a successful and well attended sprint that is wrapping up
in Düsseldorf, Germany. In the last week we had eighteen people sprinting
at the Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf on various topics. A big
chunk of the sprint was dedicated to various discussions, since we did not
manage to gather the core developers in one room in quite a while.
Discussion topics included:

* Funding and general sustainability of open source.

* Catching up with CPython 3.7/3.8 – we are planning to release 3.6 some time
  in the next few months and we will continue working on 3.7/3.8.

* What to do with VMprof

* How can we support Cython inside PyPy in a way that will be understood
  by the JIT, hence fast.

* The future of supporting the numeric stack on pypy – we have made significant
  progress in the past few years and most of the numeric stack works out of the box,
  but deployment and performance remain problems. Improving on those problems
  remains a very important focus for PyPy as a project.

* Using the presence of a CPython developer (Łukasz Langa) and a Graal Python developer
  (Tim Felgentreff) we discussed ways to collaborate in order to improve Python
  ecosystem across implementations.

* Pierre-Yves David and Georges Racinet from octobus gave us an exciting demo
  on `Heptapod`_, which adds mercurial support to gitlab.

Some highlights of the coding tasks worked on:

* Aarch64 (ARM64) JIT backend work has been started, we are able to run the first
  test! Tobias Oberstein from Crossbar GmbH and Rodolph Perfetta from ARM joined the
  sprint to help kickstart the project.

* The long running math-improvements branch that was started by Stian Andreassen got merged
  after bugfixes done by Alexander Schremmer. It should improve operations on large integers.

* The arcane art of necromancy was used to revive long dormant regalloc branch started
  and nearly finished by Carl Friedrich Bolz-Tereick. The branch got merged and gives
  some modest speedups across the board.

* Andrew Lawrence worked on MSI installer for PyPy on windows.

* Łukasz worked on improving failing tests on the PyPy 3.6 branch. He knows very obscure
  details of CPython (e.g. how pickling works), hence we managed to progress very quickly.

* Matti Picus set up a new benchmarking server for PyPy 3 branches.

* The Utf8 branch, which changes the internal representation of unicode might be finally
  merged at some point very soon. We discussed and improved upon the last few
  blockers. It gives significant speedups in a lot of cases handling strings.

* Zlib was missing couple methods, which were added by Ronan Lamy and Julian Berman.

* Manuel Jacob fixed RevDB failures.

* Antonio Cuni and Matti Picus worked on 7.0 release which should happen in a few days.

Now we are all quite exhausted, and are looking forward to catching up on sleep.

Best regards,
Maciej Fijałkowski, Carl Friedrich Bolz-Tereick and the whole PyPy team.

.. _`heptapod`: https://heptapod.net
