blog/draft/numpy-status-update-6.rst, before:

NumPy status update #6
----------------------

This is status report on PyPy's NumPyPy project.

First the update:

* **dtype support** - NumPy on PyPy now supports all the numeric dtypes in numpy,
  including non-native storage formats, longdouble, clongdouble and friends.

* **missing ndarray attributes** - work has been made toward supporting the 
  complete set of attributes
  on ndarrays. We are progressing alphabetically, and have made it to d.
  Unsupported attributes, and unsupported arguments to attribute calls
  will raise a NotImplementedException.

* **pickling support for numarray** - hasn't started yet, but next on the list

* There has been some work on exposing FFI routines in numpypy.

More importantly, we're closing on being able to run the pure-python part of
numpy without modifications. This is not getting us close to passing all
the tests, but it's a good start.

The most important part is the funding. While we managed to get a significant
amount of money in donations, we only managed to spend around $10 000 from it
so far. We have issued a call for additional developers, and hope to be able to
report on speedier progress soon.

Cheers,
Matti Picus, Maciej Fijalkowski

Commit message:

rework numpypy status report, add a mention of bdk's work

blog/draft/numpy-status-update-6.rst, after:

NumPy status update #6
----------------------

An update, and some good news

First the update:

* **dtype support** - NumPy on PyPy now supports non-native storage formats.
  Due to a lack of true support for longdoubles in rpython, we decided to back
  out the support of longdouble-as-double which was misleading.

* **missing ndarray attributes** - work has been made toward supporting the 
  complete set of attributes
  on ndarrays. We are progressing alphabetically, and have made it to d.
  Unsupported attributes, and unsupported arguments to attribute calls
  will raise a NotImplementedException.

* **pickling support for numarray** - hasn't started yet, but next on the list

* There has been some work on exposing FFI routines in numpypy.

* Brian Kearns has made progress in mapping translated _numpypy submodules to 
  the numpy core c-based submodules, furthering the goal of being able to install
  numpy as a pure-python module with few modifications. 

And now the good news:

While our funding drive over 2012 did not reach our goal, we still managed to 
raise a fair amount of money in donations. So far we only managed to spend around $10 000 of it.
We issued a call for additional developers, and are glad to welcome ___________
to the numpypy team. Hopefully we will be able to report on speedier progress soon.

Cheers,
Matti Picus, Maciej Fijalkowski
