blog/draft/success_stories.rst, before:

PyPy success stories
====================

Regular readers of this blog know the great progresses that PyPy achieved in
the past few years in terms of speed_, stability, and adoption.

All of this has been made possibile thanks to the help of the Open Source
community, but also thanks to the `Eurostars programme`_, which let some of us
core developers to work full time on PyPy for the past two years. (XXX: is it
correct? Feel free to expand this section to explain better what it is)

Our participation to Eurostars is ending in August, and at the moment we are
exploring several different ways of funding PyPy through other sources.  We
will write more about that in the next days.  During this process, it is
important to show that PyPy has stopped to be "just" a research project, but
that it is also a robust and solid solution for industries.

We would like to write a "PyPy success stories" list, and thus we ask for your
help:

  - if you are already using PyPy in production;

  - if you are actively testing PyPy on your codebase;

  - or even if you are simply considering switching to PyPy and experimenting with it;

in those cases, please let us know about it.  We would like to know which
company you work for, what are you using PyPy for, and why you decided to
switch to it.  Ideally, we would like the permission to publish these
informations and share it with the public.  

If for any reason you cannot or do not want to make them public, we are still
interested to hear about it.  In that case, don't hesitate to contact us
privately, we will not publish your data.

At your preference, you can write the information directly as a comment of
this blog post, by writing an email to the `pypy-dev`_ mailing list or by
writing a private email to me (`Antonio Cuni`_) or `Laura Creighton`_. (XXX: I
don't like too much the way I wrote this sentence, feel free to rephrase it)

We hope to hear about lots of PyPy success stories. Remind that the more of
them we collect, the easier for us to find sponsors to fund further
development of PyPy!

Commit message:

English, rephrasing, and add that if they want to sponsor pypy they should contact us about that as well.

blog/draft/success_stories.rst, after:

PyPy success stories
====================

Regular readers of this blog know the great progresses that PyPy achieved in
the past few years in terms of speed_, stability, and adoption.

All of this has been made possibile thanks to the help of the Open Source
community, but also thanks to the `Eurostars programme`_, which let some of us
core developers work full time on PyPy for the past two years. 

Our participation to Eurostars is ending in August, and at the moment we are
exploring several different ways of funding PyPy through other sources.  We
will write more about that in the next days.  During this process, it is
important to show that PyPy has stopped being "just" a research project, but
that it is also a robust and solid solution for industry.

We would like to write a list of "PyPy success stories", and thus we ask for your
help:

  - if you are already using PyPy in production;

  - if you are actively testing PyPy on your codebase;

  - or even if you are simply considering switching to PyPy and experimenting with it;

in those cases, please let us know about it.  We would like to know which
company you work for, what are you using PyPy for, and why you decided to
switch to it.  Ideally, we would like the permission to publish this
information and share it with the public.  

If for any reason you cannot or do not want to make this public, we are still
interested in hearing about you.  In that case, don't hesitate to contact us
privately - we will not publish your data.  But we have potential sponsors 
who are intersted in supporting PyPy, and showing them a list of companies
that are using PyPy (+ 3 anonymous ones in the financial services sector) is
almost as good as showing them a list with all the company names filled in.
What they are looking for is evidence that PyPy is not a research toy, but
of actual use to industry.

Please take the time to respond either as a comment to this blog post
directly, or byt sending email to the `pypy-dev`_ mailing list or by
writing a private email to me (`Antonio Cuni`_) or `Laura Creighton`_.

We hope to hear about lots of PyPy success stories. Remind that the more of
them we collect, the easier for us to find sponsors to fund further
development of PyPy!  And, of course, if any of you are interested in
_becoming_ one of these sponsors, we would like to hear about that, as well.

Thanks very much (in advance) for all your help,
Laura and Anto (for the entire PyPy team)
